GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: the election upset in
Canada, as the Liberal Party
claims a stunning victory
promising higher taxes on the
wealthy to boost a sluggish
economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Tuesday, what prompted one
teacher to tell students they
shouldn't take some
of their tests?
GWEN IFILL: And rock legend
Patti Smith reveals what
inspires her, from poetry to
CSI.
PATTI SMITH, Author, "M Train":
I'm interested in the mind of
the detective and his process,
which to me is a lot
like the artist.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Canada's 35
million people woke today to a
new political era, ushering
out almost a decade of
Conservative leadership. The
Liberal Party won an outright
majority
in Parliament in
Monday's election.
The results mean that
43-year-old Justin Trudeau will
be the country's new prime
minister.
President Obama called Trudeau
today to congratulate him. We
will look at how the Liberals
did
it after the news summary.
GWEN IFILL: Here at home, the
presidential field shrank by one
today. Former Virginia
Senator Jim Webb dropped out of
the Democratic contest. Webb
failed to gain traction in the
polls, and now says he's not
sure he will stay a Democrat.
JIM WEBB (D), Former U.S.
Senator: I fully accept that my
views on many issues are not
compatible with the power
structure or the nominating base
of the Democratic Party. That
party is filled with millions of
dedicated, hardworking
Americans, but its hierarchy is
not comfortable with many of the
policies that I have laid forth,
and, frankly, I'm
not that comfortable
with many of theirs.
GWEN IFILL: Webb left the door
open for a possible run as an
independent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans in
the House of Representatives
convened this evening to mull
their choice for speaker. It
came amid reports that Paul Ryan
of Wisconsin is edging closer
to running. He was the party's
vice presidential nominee in
2012. A conservative faction
pressured
Speaker John Boehner to resign,
and then drove Kevin McCarthy
from the race to succeed him.
The party caucus plans to
meet again tomorrow night.
GWEN IFILL: The United States
and Russia signed an agreement
today to limit the risk of
incidents
in the skies over Syria.
Warplanes from both countries
are carrying out airstrikes, and
there've been reports of
several close encounters.
At the Pentagon, spokesman Peter
Cook said the agreement doesn't
include sharing target
information, but it does
lay out safety procedures.
PETER COOK, Pentagon Press
Secretary: These protocols
include maintaining professional
airmanship at all times, the use
of specific communication
frequencies, and the
establishment
of a communication line on the
ground. The U.S. and Russia will
form a working group
to discuss any implementation
issues that follow.
GWEN IFILL: In Syria, Russian
airstrikes overnight killed at
least 45 people, including a
rebel
commander. A monitoring group in
London says the strikes hit
coastal Latakia province,
the stronghold of President
Bashar al-Assad. The monitors
also reported three Russians
were killed fighting alongside
Syrian army troops. The Kremlin
denied it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The top U.S.
military officer is playing down
chances that Iraq will ask
for Russian airstrikes against
Islamic State fighters. General
Joseph Dunford offered that
opinion today on his first trip
to Iraq since becoming chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Dunford met first with the head
of the Kurdish regional
government in Irbil. Later, he
conferred
with the Iraqi defense
minister in Baghdad.
GWEN IFILL: U.N.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
made a surprise visit to
Jerusalem today,
hoping to halt a wave of
violence. He arrived as
Palestinians clashed with
Israeli soldiers
in Ramallah in the West Bank.
Elsewhere, two Palestinians were
killed following separate
attacks on Israelis.
That brought this
appeal from Ban:
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General: No society
should have to live in fear. No
society can afford to see its
youth suffer in hopelessness. If
we do not act fast, the
dynamics on the ground may only
get worse, with serious
repercussions in and beyond
Israel
and Palestine.
GWEN IFILL: Ban is slated to
meet with Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
during his trip.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the first
time, officials in Japan have
confirmed a case of cancer that
may be linked to the Fukushima
plant nuclear disaster. The
plant was heavily damaged by
an earthquake and tsunami in
March 2011. The patient
announced today had installed
covers
on damaged reactors there. The
man also worked at other nuclear
sites, but most of his radiation
exposure came at Fukushima.
GWEN IFILL: And on Wall Street,
weak earnings reports from IBM
and others kept stocks down.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 13 points to close at
17217. The Nasdaq fell 24
points,
and the S&P 500
slipped about three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a political comeback for
Canada's Liberal Party; the
number
of migrants flooding into Europe
tops a half-million; North
Dakota's oil boom brings back a
lost
sports tradition, and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to that
stunning victory for the Liberal
Party in Canada, and an incoming
prime minister with politics
in his blood, Justin Trudeau.
The Liberals won a resounding
majority with 184 seats out of
338, increasing their vote
share in every province since
the last election in 2011.
Conservative seats dropped below
100, losing ground in every
province except Quebec, and the
New Democrats won 44 seats.
Forty-three-year-old Justin
Trudeau, a teacher and the son
of the late Canadian prime
minister
Pierre Trudeau, watched the
election results with his young
family.
Later, he addressed his
supporters in Montreal.
JUSTIN TRUDEAU, Canadian Prime
Minister-Elect: Canadians have
spoken. You want a government
with a vision and an agenda for
this country that is positive
and ambitious and hopeful.
Well, my friends I promise you
tonight that I will lead that
government.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUSTIN TRUDEAU: I will make that
vision a reality. I will be that
prime minister.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Outgoing
Conservative Prime Minister
Stephen Harper conceded his loss
in Calgary last night. He also
quit as leader of the
Conservative Party.
For more on the Canadian vote,
I'm joined by John Northcott of
the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation.
John Northcott, welcome.
So, this was a surprise.
JOHN NORTHCOTT, Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation: Yes,
very much so.
The polls had it neck and neck
for a while, and then in the few
days before the election,
there was a suggestion there
might be a minority one way or
the other, either for the
Conservatives
or for the Liberals. Very few,
though, even in the hours up to
Election Day, and the results
coming in last night, really
thought that Justin Trudeau
could get, if not a majority,
then the majority that he got,
the resounding majority,
effectively quintupling his
results
from before.
No party has ever gone from what
is effectively third-party place
to a resounding majority
like that in Canadian
electoral history.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What happened
last night? What changed?
JOHN NORTHCOTT: Well, a
number of things changed.
It was the longest campaign in
modern Canadian electoral
history. It allowed the
electorate
to get to know the candidates,
in the case of the incumbent
prime minister, Stephen Harper,
perhaps got to know him a little
too well, to the point where
dislike became a sharpened
point of hate in some cases.
As for Justin Trudeau, the
public didn't know him that
well. He had been the subject of
long, withering attack campaign
from the Conservatives even long
before the election was called.
Effectively, what they did,
arguably, was lower expectations
to the point where he had
to only exceed them. The joke is
made that he only had to show up
for the debates wearing
pants and he'd make a
positive impression.
He did show up. He did wear
pants. And he had very few
missteps. Many are saying that
he ran a very smart campaign.
He's young. He's energetic. And
over time, over those
11 weeks -- and I know that's
short by American standards, but
it's very long by Canadian
standards -- the public decide
that he deserved a chance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why was
Harper so unpopular?
JOHN NORTHCOTT: Well, it was a
variety of things. He'd been in
power a long time and
the sense of a familiarity
breeding contempt there.
But at the same time, he had a
number of policies that, group
by group, the opposition added
up against him. At various
times, he has not fared well
with veterans. He has not fared
well with farmers. He has not
fared well with the elderly.
This, as you can imagine, is
a core constituency for a
party on the far right.
And over time, people grew sick
of him, and in the last days of
the campaign, what appeared
to be a number of desperation
members -- movements, rather,
including showing up at an event
with
Rob Ford, you will remember, the
disgraced former mayor of
Toronto, admitted crack user
and heavy drinker, many saw that
as a final desperation move by
Harper to garner last
votes. And there was blood in
the water, and people at that
point really decided that they
had had enough right
across the country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I read that it
was also his positions on
climate change, on foreign
military
intervention. And what is it
about this dispute about Muslim
women wearing the face veil,
the niqab? What was
that all about?
JOHN NORTHCOTT: Yes. That, too,
sparked a lot of concern in the
final days of the campaign.
Effectively, his party has
argued that women shouldn't be
allowed to show up for the
citizenship
swearing-in ceremony wearing the
niqab. Now, you have to present
yourself. You have to
reveal yourself to a female
officer, and identify yourself
with proper documentation.
But for the public swearing-in
ceremony, there was a raging
debate that ended up in the
courts,
with the government of Stephen
Harper saying, no, these women
had to show their faces, the
women saying, no, they didn't
feel comfortable showing their
faces in a public way in the
ceremony. They won in court and
where actually one in particular
was sworn in and managed
to vote on Election Day.
That had a lot of people, some
of the hard right, they were
attracted by that position,
but Harper went on to say he
might even consider bringing in
this sort of thing in the
federal
civil service with public
displays of religion. And a lot
of people had thought of, say,
for
example, the Jewish skullcap,
the Sikh turban, and they
started thinking, you know what?
This is going too far.
And it became a battle in the
last few days over values,
Canadian values, what do we hold
dear, the ability to come to
this country, to immigrate to
this country and to be free
to be yourself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me just
quickly ask you in the end, what
do people expect Trudeau
to do differently? What is he
saying he's going to change?
JOHN NORTHCOTT: Well, the
Liberals have a long tradition
of running from the left and
governing from the right.
So, you are not going to see a
niqab debate. That's for sure.
You're going to see some
spending on infrastructure. Many
parts of Canada, major cities,
need things like increased
transit and better roads, so
you're going to see some
spending and some job creation
there as well.
But as far as the business
community, as far as dealing
with our largest trading partner
across the border in the United
States, you are going to see
someone who is pro-trade,
someone who is pro-pipeline in
terms of the controversial
Keystone XL pipeline moving
through the United States and
going into the Gulf of Mexico.
And you are going to see someone
who wants to do business with
the world, despite being called
-- quote, unquote -- as "a
liberal."
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Northcott of
the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation, getting used to
a new prime minister,
we thank you.
GWEN IFILL: There was little
relief today from the wave of
migrants pouring into Eastern
Europe. As officials on the
ground struggled to cope,
governments ratcheted up their
war
of words.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: All day, they
kept coming in the thousands, as
Slovenian police on horseback
tried to herd them to
packed reception centers.
Slovenia says nearly 20,000
migrants have entered the
country from Croatia since
Friday.
And, today, Parliament
considered sending additional
troops to help prevent illegal
crossings. Officials talked of
more drastic action as well.
BOSTJAN SEFIC, State Secretary,
Slovenian Interior Ministry
(through translator): I
don't know what the future will
bring. And you know that
Slovenia had a restrained
attitude
so far. But we cannot rule out
the possibility of using
physical barriers to secure
border
crossings.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In addition,
Slovenia's president traveled to
Brussels, asking the European
Union to help police the
frontier. The new influx began
when Hungary closed the last
of its southern border
posts in recent days.
That forced refugees reaching
Croatia, to take the new route
toward Slovenia. The Slovenians
complained again today that
Croatia is dumping throngs of
people on its border without
control.
But Croatia said, in turn, that
thousands are stranded in
mud-caked fields along its
southern border with Serbia.
The Croatian interior minister
said Slovenia must take at least
half of those arriving
in order to keep
the line moving.
MAN: What we are expecting here
now is that they're able to
handle the 5,000 people. If
we are receiving 10,000, then
5,000 people have to be
transited to Slovenia.
MALCOLM BRABANT: All of this as
arrivals at the southern end of
the refugee route have
reached new records. Some 8,000
crossed from the Eastern Aegean
Sea from Turkey to Greece
yesterday alone. The voyage to
islands like Lesbos is far
shorter and relatively safer
during the summer an the
crossing from North Africa to
Italy, but it is still a
perilous
undertaking.
It's estimated that more than
3,000 people have drowned so far
this year. And the U.N.
refugee office in Greece
fears more will die.
RON REDMOND, UNHCR: Well, as
winter approaches, people are
desperate and they're still
going
to keep trying. They might wait
for a calm day. But if it's not,
the smugglers give them
a discount. And they will -- as
much as, say, 40 or 50 percent,
if they will take a boat
in stormy weather. And
some people do it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's been one
of those days that has really
emphasized the fickle nature
of the Aegean Sea. A boat full
of refugees landed in Lesbos
today and the people on board
told volunteers that the boat
directly behind them had
disappeared. Their story has
been
confirmed by Greek coast guard
tonight, who said there have
been drownings inside Turkish
waters.
But, tonight, the Coast Guard
off the island of Lesbos have
been in action. They have
rescued
60 people. The sea was flat
calm, yet all of these people
were in danger of drowning.
The weather is about to change,
which creates a real dilemma for
those people in Turkey
who want to rush to Europe
before more borders close.
Those who do make it across the
Aegean may face an increasingly
hostile reception. Last
night, 15,000 to 20,000
anti-immigration protesters
gathered in Dresden, Germany,
which, up to
now, has been one of the most
receptive countries to migrants.
And in Sweden, where more than
150,000 refugees are expected to
arrive this year, a fourth
building housing asylum seekers
was torched overnight in a
suspected arson attack.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Athens.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
teacher's stance against
standardized testing; an oil
boom
becomes a boon for high school
football; and a professor's take
on why talented girls still
aren't becoming scientists.
GWEN IFILL: But, first, we will
turn to a pair of health stories
getting a lot of attention
today. In a moment, we explore
why one of the most important
voices in cancer research,
the American Cancer Society, is
changing its guidelines for
mammograms.
But, first, we turn to a
landmark study that could change
the way schizophrenia is
treated.
More than two million Americans
have this chronic and sometimes
severe brain disorder.
Symptoms can include
hallucinations, delusions and
hearing voices, and problems
with memory,
fatigue and depression.
For years, this has been treated
with high level -- high levels
of potent antipsychotic
drugs. But a new study finds
lower doses, combined with
therapy and support, can be
more effective.
Dr. Robert Heinssen is with the
National Institute of Mental
Health, which funded the
six-year
study.
Welcome.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN, National
Institute of Mental Health: Good
evening.
GWEN IFILL: First, define for
people what schizophrenia
actually is. People know what
they know from TV and movies.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: So,
schizophrenia is a condition
that affects the way the person
interacts with the world. They
can experience an altered sense
of perception. Their thinking
can be impaired. It also affects
the kind of emotional
experiences they have.
So, people may withdraw from
those around them. They may lose
opportunities to pursue
their education or to get a job.
So, it's -- it affects the
quality of their thinking,
the quality of their emotional
life, and their relationships in
general.
GWEN IFILL: And how has it
been treated typically?
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: Well, in
the United States, we have
tended to have a treatment
system
that focuses on the latter
stages of the disorder. So,
sometimes, people are ill for
several
years before they come to the
attention of the health care
system. And once they do come
into the health care system, the
focus is on managing the
psychotic symptoms that are
distressing to the individual,
their family, and are often the
calls of drawing negative
attention to the person.
GWEN IFILL: So, a big part of
this finding is that early
treatment is necessary, I
assume,
since you're saying that so much
of this is diagnosed late, but
also talk therapy instead
of drug therapy. Explain
the difference.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: So, what we
know about the needs of people
with schizophrenia are
that there are multiple areas of
impairment, their psychotic
symptoms, their social
functioning.
There's cognition in terms of
thinking and memory and so
forth. And there's also
functional
capability, school and work.
Medications do a very, very good
job with psychotic symptoms.
They can give people relief from
the psychotic symptoms, but they
don't necessarily touch
the other areas of impairment.
For that, we need therapies that
can engage the person's
interests, their motivation,
their curiosity, give them a
pathway to recovery, and then
support them in that process,
where
they can learn and be
reinforced, acquire more
adaptive stances.
GWEN IFILL: It sounds like the
support is more than just
treatment. It's also family
support and support in
the workplace as well.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: So, the
experience of psychosis is very
traumatic for the family.
Very often, the people closest
to the individual with
schizophrenia are at a loss.
What is
going on? How can we help?
So this treatment takes that
into account, emphasizes
education for family members,
support
for family members, and really
engaging them as active partners
in helping the person recover.
GWEN IFILL: Two of the things
that leap to mind as you think
about schizophrenia, or
any disease like this, is the
side effects of drug therapy and
whether that also caused
you to search for an
alternative, and also the cost
of drug therapy, or of talk
therapy,
which is more expensive.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: So, in
terms of the side effects, you
know, we know that people in
the early stages of psychosis
are very responsive to
antipsychotic medications.
They actually get a much more
robust response than people who
have been ill for years. But
they're also more vulnerable to
side effects. So it's a very --
it's a balancing act to
find a therapeutic window where
you're getting good benefit, but
minimizing the side effects,
because some of the side effects
include things like weight gain
that actually then put the
person at risk for medical
conditions like diabetes, heart
disease, and so forth.
So, in this treatment, there's
very, very careful attention to
the dose of the medications,
how the person is experiencing
that dose in terms of relief,
what kinds of side effects
they may be developing, and then
a careful integration of medical
and psychiatric care
to make sure that we're not
compounding the problems of
psychosis with medical problems
that have their own burden.
GWEN IFILL: And as
far as expense?
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: Well, you
know, there will be a
cost-effectiveness analysis that
will follow the study
that was reported today.
But our initial sense of this
is, is that, yes, there are more
up-front costs in terms
of outpatient treatment, the
individual therapy, the family
treatment, the supported
employment
and education, which is key to
getting the person back on the
path to meaningful work.
But we really think that these
up-front costs will be offset,
both by reduced reliance on
emergency and crisis care,
in-patient hospitalizations and
emergency room visits, but also,
because
people have a much greater
opportunity to become employed,
become citizens who are fully
engaged in the work force,
making contributions, that those
factors will be included in the
cost-effectiveness and probably
will show us that, in the long
run, this is well worth
the investment, the investment
in these young people's future.
GWEN IFILL: So there's a payback
in other ways, is what you're
saying?
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: Well, I
think there's a payback to our
society, that we get fully
functioning citizens
who are -- yes.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Who are
fully functioning.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: Who are
fully functioning and fully
contributing, which is what they
want, as a society,
what we should want.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
Dr. Robert Heinssen of the
National Institute of Mental
Health, thank you very much.
DR. ROBERT HEINSSEN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to the
details of the breast cancer
news.
The American Cancer Society's
revised mammogram guidelines
recommend that women with an
average
risk of cancer start annual
screenings at age 45. That's
five years later than the
society's
prior guidelines that
recommended starting at age 40.
There have been years of debate
and numerous studies questioning
the value of these screenings
and the age at which they
should begin, often forcing
women to weigh the risk of false
diagnoses and overtreatment
vs. early treatment that
can save a woman's life.
Here to explain the new
guidelines, and the shift in
thinking they represent, is Dr.
Richard
Wender. He's the chief cancer
control officer with the
American Cancer Society.
Dr. Wender, thank you
for being with us.
Why is 45 now the magic number,
not 40, not 50, which some
organizations still recommend?
DR. RICHARD WENDER, American
Cancer Society: Well, there
actually is no magic number.
What our guideline group found
is that the risk of breast
cancer increases as a woman
ages. And that's really what
determines the balance of
benefits and harm. So, we
actually
recommend that all women start
the discussion about mammography
at 40, and we absolutely
endorse women having the choice
to begin screening at age 40.
But we state that, by age 45,
the benefits substantially
outweigh the harms for the
entire
population. And that's the age
where all women should be
starting regular annual
mammography,
assuming they have not
started before age 45.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So what is the
new information that has come
in, in the last six years, since
the American Cancer Society said
it was most comfortable telling
women to start at age
40? What makes you now
comfortable to say that it's 45?
DR. RICHARD WENDER: Well,
actually, our last full
guideline for average risk was
written
way back in 2003.
So, back then, there was no
expectation that guideline
groups would balance the
benefits
and the drawbacks of screening.
That now is a standard. We also
have some new data about
the interval for screening
before menopause and after
menopause.
And there are also some new
observational trials that
actually tell us just how
valuable
mammography is. The goal of this
new guideline is to highlight
the populations who are at
-- most likely to benefit, most
likely to have the greatest
benefit, but, at the same
time, giving women a choice to
begin screening earlier and to
continue screening more
regularly
beyond menopause based on her
personal values and her
preferences.
But it's important to understand
that the risk of developing
breast cancer at age 40
is actually still quite small,
and that's why there's a greater
likelihood that a woman
will experience a false positive
and a lower likelihood that she
will get actual benefit.
But many women place great value
on the opportunity to prevent a
breast cancer death. And we
expect
many women will want to continue
starting at 40. But our message
is very clear, that
if you haven't already started,
please start regular mammography
at 45, because this guideline
really proves that the most
effective thing that a woman can
do to reduce her chances
of dying of breast cancer are
to have regular mammograms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
it is a striking shift in the
eyes of those who read what the
American Cancer Society was
saying some years ago.
We found an opinion column that
Dr. Otis Brawley, who was the
chief medical officer for the
Cancer Society -- he wrote this
in 2009. He said, not only
should women start having
mammograms,
most women, at age 40. He said
not doing so could be fatal, he
said, for many women. He
said turning the clock back will
add up to too many lives lost.
DR. RICHARD WENDER: Well, the --
I think you said it well. This
will be seen as a dramatic
shift.
I think it's actually a nuanced
shift. This new guideline is
more personalized, it's more
tailored. It helps women really
have a road map to follow
throughout her life in making
screening decisions, helps her
understand that, when you hit
40, the likelihood of benefit
is lower and it gradually keeps
going up because your risk of
breast cancer goes up and makes
that clear statement at 45.
We looked at this issue of 50,
and found that, actually, the
balance of benefits and harms
of screening for women 45 to 49
is actually quite similar for
women 50 to 54. And we felt
it was important that we give a
clear message that all women
should start by age 45.
So, our last guideline was in
2003. The whole approach to
thinking about screening has
changed.
There is a higher expectation
that women be informed, be
empowered to take into account
their own personal values. And I
think this guideline does just
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Wender, what
do you say to women, though, who
may still be confused,
because, as you know, there are
other respected groups out there
recommending different times?
How do women make sense of all
this? What should they do?
DR. RICHARD WENDER: Well, our
old guideline, annual screening
starting at 40, sounded very
simple, but it wasn't
eliminating the confusion,
because it was forcing women and
clinicians
to just make a choice, am I
going to follow this guideline
or am I going to follow the
other guideline?
This guideline actually takes a
person through her lifespan and
helps her get the information
she needs to make a decision at
each point along that journey.
So, I think, although
it is more complicated, it
actually will create greater
clarity.
But it does mean three things. A
woman is going to have to work
hard to gather greater
information to be more informed.
Two, it creates an obligation
for clinicians to really help
women get this information and
help them conduct a shared
decision with their patients.
And,
three, it creates an obligation
for organizations like the
American Cancer Society to make
sure
that we have the information
available for clinicians, for
patients, and that we produce
decision aids that can help
really people make this
decision.
So, it is -- it's more nuanced,
personalized, a bit more
complicated, but we actually
think
it's going to create greater
clarity, not greater confusion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Dr. Richard
Wender with the American Cancer
Society, thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Not long ago, I
traveled to Seattle to talk with
Bill and Melinda gates, the
Microsoft
billionaires who have become
leading philanthropists for a
school reform movement that
champions
testing for students
and teachers.
But not everyone agrees with
that approach, not even in the
Gates Foundation's home town.
While in Seattle, I talked with
one of the teachers leading the
opposition.
The report is part of our
American Graduate series, a
public media initiative funded
by
the Corporation for
Public Broadcasting.
JESSE HAGOPIAN, Teacher,
Garfield High School: Think
about how this history relates
to your
life, and we will come back to
the classroom and have a
discussion.
GWEN IFILL: Jesse Hagopian
is a teacher on a mission.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: You can
go at your own pace.
GWEN IFILL: He wants his
Garfield High School students to
know their history, that Jimi
Hendrix and Quincy Jones ones
walked these halls before the
students were even born.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: Take a second
to read some of the history.
GWEN IFILL: And he wants them to
know their choices, among them,
the right to opt out
of the standardized tests
Washington State schools use to
gauge student performance.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: Studies have
shown that kids will take some
113 standardized tests now
in their K-12 career. It's just
become completely over the top.
It's become a
multibillion-dollar
industry to sell exams to
children in order to rank and
sort them. And it's become
really
a test-and-punish model.
GWEN IFILL: The tests are part
of the Common Core standards
adopted by 24 states and the
District of Columbia to improve
student achievement and teacher
performance. The program has
become
a flash point for advocates on
both ends of the political
spectrum.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: So who has
the most rushing yards?
GWEN IFILL: Thirty-six-year-old
Hagopian, a married father of
two who cut his teeth
as a Teach for America
instructor in Washington, D.C.,
returned to his alma mater in
2010 to
teach history.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: Today is going
to be all about trying to
connect your life to history.
What
does history have to do with me?
GWEN IFILL: By 2013, he was
leading a boycott of one of the
major tests mandated by the
Seattle Public Schools.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: I want you to
look at it through a whole
different lens.
GWEN IFILL: The school
superintendent still supports
the tests, but they're not
required
to graduate. And last month,
Seattle schoolteachers took that
protest a step further, walking
off their jobs for the
first time in 30 years.
The fight against what he calls
excessive testing pits Hagopian
against not only the
U.S. Department of Education...
JESSE HAGOPIAN: So, are you
going to speak some Spanish
today?
GWEN IFILL: ... but also against
deep-pocketed school reformers
who push for the tests to
measure progress.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: Yes. The
corporate education reformers,
they have one view of
assessment,
and that view of assessment is
informed by this: If you see a
kid with hypothermia, and
he's shaking uncontrollably,
what you need to do is go take
his temperature. And then,
once you have taken his
temperature, you take his
temperature again, and then you
take it
again and again.
And then the really
sophisticated thought is that
you actually should then use a
digital
thermometer if you're in the
21st century. Our philosophy of
assessment is a lot different.
If you see a kid shaking
uncontrollably because they're
cold, you wrap them in a
blanket.
And you nurture them and you
give them the resources that
they would need to recover.
GWEN IFILL: Garfield High School
is not new to social protest.
Stokely Carmichael and
Martin Luther King Jr. both drew
thousands when they spoke here.
Decades later, Senator
Barack Obama paid a visit as
well. And when it comes to
Common Core testing, both
teachers
and students have
joined the boycott.
Senior Shedrick Johnson has ever
intention of heading off to
college next year without
taking the Measures of Academic
Progress test, known as MAP.
SHEDRICK JOHNSON, Student: I
think it's a waste of time. We
already have the SATs, the
ACTs. We have to have a certain
grade-point average to even get
into college, and we don't
need another hindrance
in front of us.
GWEN IFILL: Did your mother
think, wait a second, they said
you had to take a test,
you have to take a test?
SHEDRICK JOHNSON: She sure did.
She sure did. I had to really
explain it to her and explain
that it's not a graduation
requirement. And when I broke
down the process to her, she
said, OK, that's fine. Just let
me sign the slip and then you go
on back to class.
GWEN IFILL: There are strange
bedfellows in this fight.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: Sometimes, I get
accused of not liking tests,
but, in fact, I really find
authentic assessment important.
GWEN IFILL: Many conservatives,
including most Republican
presidential candidates, condemn
the Common Core standards as
government overreach, while
liberals like Hagopian say they
promote
inequality.
JESSE HAGOPIAN: I think that we
are in the midst of the largest
uprising against high-stakes
testing in U.S. history. Never
before have there been more
parents, students, and teachers
resisting these exams and the
standards that they come
shrink-wrapped with, and it's
been
breathtaking to watch.
In New York State, there were
200,000 families alone that
opted their kids out of the
test.
Have a good afternoon, you guys.
Right here in Washington, we had
approaching 60,000 families opt
their kids out of the
Common Core test this past year,
including over half of all
juniors in the state, an
incredible uprising of parents
that want a much bigger vision
for the purpose of education
and for understanding
what their kids know.
Both brothers became active
in the black student union.
GWEN IFILL: The protest is
catching on, at least in
Seattle. Last year, fewer than
of the 3,000 10th graders who
sat for the test opted out. This
year, the number shot
up to 500, including half
the students at Garfield.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And an editor's
note about a story that aired on
the "NewsHour" last
week from longtime education
reporter John Merrow.
The story focused on school
policies for suspending very
young children. Eva Moskowitz,
CEO of
the New York City-based charter
school Success Academy, has
since raised questions or
concerns
that, during her interview, she
was asked questions only about
suspension policy in
general, and not given an
opportunity to respond to a
family also interviewed in the
report.
While the "NewsHour" stands by
the report, we regret that
decision.
You can read Ms. Moskowitz's
response to the report and more
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: High school
football is the center of life
for many small towns in rural
America.
Due to the oil and gas boom in
Western North Dakota, one town
is celebrating the return
of that tradition for the first
time in over a quarter-century.
Emily Guerin of Inside Energy, a
public media reporting project,
brings us the story from
Alexander, North Dakota.
EMILY GUERIN: It's the day
before the first game of the
season for the Alexander Comets.
The players are really excited.
JAYY MORGAN, Student: I can't
wait for tomorrow to come. My
head's going to explode right
now if tomorrow doesn't
hurry up and get here.
EMILY GUERIN: For 28 years,
Alexander didn't have a football
team. Now it does, thanks
to new kids like Jayy
Morgan, number 34.
Last year, Morgan's mom moved
from Bakersfield, California, to
North Dakota. She came for
a job at a truck stop in
the Bakken oil field.
KEVIN CLAUSEN, Football Coach,
Alexander Comets: Let's go from
the 30 all the way down. Now
we can at least see
where we're at here.
EMILY GUERIN: Football coach
Kevin Clausen says about half of
the kids on the team are
here because of the oil fields.
KEVIN CLAUSEN: But I feel like,
because of the oil boom, we now
have a football team.
You know, it brought many
families to this school, which
increased the enrollment, and,
you know, gave the school the
capability to actually do this.
EMILY GUERIN: Before the oil
boom took off in 2008,
Alexander's single K-12 school
only
had 55 kids, and there were no
varsity sports. Like so many
small towns on the Great Plains,
Alexander was shrinking, as
young people moved away and
farms grew larger and more
mechanized.
LESLIE BIEBER, Superintendent,
Alexander Public Schools: Well,
now, Brian, do you identify
which muscle you injured?
EMILY GUERIN: Superintendent
Leslie Bieber remembers what
that felt like.
LESLIE BIEBER: I don't want to
say that it was bad. It wasn't,
because you still had
that small community coming
together, and helping each other
out. But it was sad to
see a community die.
EMILY GUERIN: The Bakken oil
boom has changed all that. The
town has grown by 60 percent
since 2008. And now there are
more than 200 kids in the
school, and the kids are still
coming, despite low oil prices
and thousands of leaves. There's
finally enough students
to bring back varsity sports,
including football -- well,
six-man football.
The school is still too small
for 11-man, and yet Bieber says
people in town could not
be more excited.
LESLIE BIEBER: When we laid the
sod for the football field, it
was 90-some degrees. Community
members came in the middle of
the afternoon to help lay the
sod when it was 90-some degrees.
That doesn't happen unless you
are excited about bringing that
back.
EMILY GUERIN: The Comets' first
football game took place during
Alexander's Old Settler
phase, the town's annual
celebration of its farming and
ranching heritage.
Before the game, everyone,
including the football team,
wandered over to the massive
barbecue
pit. There, the men of Alexander
were digging up meat that had
been slow-cooked overnight.
Working the meat-cutting table
is Jerry Hatter, the mayor of
Alexander. He also works for
a drilling company.
Hatter has a pretty complicated
relationship with the oil
fields, like many people I met
here. On the one hand, he is
grateful for all the new
families moving into town. On
the other hand,
it's overwhelming.
JERRY HATTER, Mayor of
Alexander, North Dakota:
Everything grew so fast, and
there were so
many people, and Western North
Dakota never had a lot of
people. And I think just the
influx of all the people is what
really did it for a lot of
people.
EMILY GUERIN: Alexander may have
been slowly dying before the oil
boom, but some people
liked it that way.
Hatter is one of them.
JERRY HATTER: I hate the fact
that I can drive down places
that there was never anything,
and it's nothing but solid
pumping units and roads and
traffic. And it's changed the
landscape,
but it's given me a lot. So...
EMILY GUERIN: The oil boom is
really love-hate for people here
in Alexander, so that's why
the return of football is so
important. It's something
everyone can be excited about,
no
matter how they feel
about the oil field.
After the barbecue, it was time
for the big game. The place was
packed. People drove their
pickups right up to the edge of
the field. Both old and new
Alexander were there, locals
like Mayor Jerry Hatter, people
who lived here long before the
boom got started, and
newcomers, people
drawn here for work.
Everyone was hoping the Comets
would win, but as the game went
on, that seemed like
a long shot. The Grass
Range/Winnett Rangers from a
small high school in Eastern
Montana
were bigger and more experienced
than the Comets. They
intercepted a lot of Comets'
passes and scored a
lot of touchdowns.
But unless you looked at the
scoreboard, you would have no
way of knowing the Comets were
losing by a lot. The crowd
cheered at every tackle. People
were just happy to be there.
This is the sense of community
that was missing those 28 years
that Alexander didn't have
football. And bringing it back
is especially meaningful for
people like Leanna
Halvorson-Dean.
LEANNA HALVORSON-DEAN, Resident
of Alexander, North Dakota: In
this community, farmers,
ranchers, you get caught up in
your lives and you lose track.
And it's, let's give everybody
back.
EMILY GUERIN: Even if it wasn't
the glorious victory they hoped
for, just having football
back is a win for Alexander.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Emily Guerin in Alexander, North
Dakota.
GWEN IFILL: Forty years ago, a
poet and performer named Patti
Smith crashed onto the rock
scene
with her debut album, "Horses."
Five years ago, she made another
kind of splash, winning
the National Book Award for a
memoir titled "Just Kids" about
her early years in New York
and her friendship with the
photographer Robert
Mapplethorpe.
Now she's back with another book
titled "M Train." The M is for
memory, a trip through
time to writers and artists who
influenced her and to her own
loved ones now gone.
Patti Smith talked with Jeffrey
Brown recently at the George
Washington University Library
for our "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: Patti
Smith, welcome to you.
PATTI SMITH, Author,
"M Train": Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: One theme that I
saw is where art comes from and
how it's transmitted, because
so much what you're writing
about is going to authors who
have inspired you, artists
who have influenced you, and it
sounds like you were thinking
about that transmission.
PATTI SMITH: Well, I'm always
thinking about that. I have
thought about that my while
life.
I thought about that when we
recorded "Horses" 40 years ago,
when we wrote songs in memory
of Jim Morrison and Jimi
Hendrix. But I didn't have any
particular design. It just
happened
that I was ruminating on these
things. And, like you said, it's
a natural course of my
life. And I think a lot
of it is about process.
JEFFREY BROWN: A lot of it
unfolds literally in a cafe,
right?
PATTI SMITH: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Sitting in a
cafe. And it's interesting,
because there's a point where
you write about how there were
no cafes in your childhood.
PATTI SMITH: I was raised in
South Jersey. I had read about
them in books about French
poets, seen lots of photographs
of mostly French or Moroccan
writers in cafes. And I
was beguiled by them. But I
didn't see them in person until
I went to New York City.
JEFFREY BROWN: Many of the
vignettes here are about people
who have influenced you.
PATTI SMITH: Well, yes, I mean,
it's a way of identification,
but also showing gratitude,
I think.
JEFFREY BROWN: Gratitude
for their work?
PATTI SMITH: Yes. I'm grateful
all the time that Louisa May
Alcott wrote "Little Women."
I'm grateful the New Testament
was written. I love books, and I
love what the hand of
mankind produces, whether
painting or music, opera.
I just think it's wonderful
that we have that in our life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, there's the
high and there's the low. Right?
There's television.
You love to watch "CSI" and you
love to watch PBS mystery shows.
PATTI SMITH: Oh, yes, I
love "Masterpiece Theater."
And when I was a kid, I loved
Sherlock Holmes. I'm not
interested in crimes. I'm
interested
in the mind of the detective and
his process, which to me is a
lot like the artist.
JEFFREY BROWN: And the other
thing that comes out in the book
and in your life is the
photography,
right, photographs of a table, a
chair of a writer that you love,
or the bed of an artist
like Frida Kahlo.
What are they, these objects?
PATTI SMITH: They're like
relics, really. Because I travel
so much, I might one day
see the grave of James Joyce and
the other day see the typewriter
of Hermann Hesse, just
day after day, seeing such
wondrous things, and that I want
to remember, but I also want
to share with others.
JEFFREY BROWN: You refer in the
book to these influences as
portals, windows. To what?
PATTI SMITH: Well, you know, I
can hold my father's favorite
coffee cup, and I'm transported
to the atmosphere of my father.
The other day at the New York
Public Library, I saw the very
humble dipping pen of Charles
Dickens. And holding these
things, I could almost sense the
scratching of the pen over
the paper. It doesn't have to be
a profound thing. It's just a
moment of clarity or a
moment feeling a sense of
the owner of these things.
JEFFREY BROWN: For those of us
who grew up listening to you and
thinking of you as rock
'n' roller, this love of books
was there first, I guess, right,
for you?
PATTI SMITH: Oh, absolutely.
When I was a little girl, my
parents read voraciously, and
there was always books
everywhere,
and I was very curious about
them, so I learned to read quite
early. And I just loved books.
JEFFREY BROWN: And
you wanted to write.
PATTI SMITH: I didn't think of
it until I read "Little Women."
And Jo was such a great role
model. She was sort of
tomboyish, like I was, and what
they
used to call a bookworm, and she
wrote. And then I thought, ah, I
can write, just like
Jo. And I was quite young, but I
took that in my heart as my
vocation.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, there
is also in this book a lot of --
an air of solitude.
There's loss, some 20-plus years
since your husband, Fred, died.
Is it in some way a response
to that sense of loss?
PATTI SMITH: Really, it just
threaded its way through the
book.
Truthfully, I didn't want to
write about loss at all. I
wanted to write something where
I was unfettered by any
destination, any responsibility.
Yet we are who we are. And I
often -- my husband,
Fred, is always with me and in
my thoughts, as my mother and my
father. So the people
they love and lost found their
way in this book. I didn't
expect them to find their way,
but they did. So
I welcomed them.
JEFFREY BROWN: And now you find
yourself, I think, an
established -- well-established
writer, as well as musician.
Does that feel right to you?
PATTI SMITH: I always hesitate
when people call me a musician.
I have had no musical training.
I can't play anything. I really
think of myself as a performer.
It's always been writing for me.
I evolved with my band in rock
'n' roll through poetry,
not through music. I feel At
this point I have spent at least
60 years writing. I guess
I can at last call
myself a writer.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
the new book is "M Train."
Patti Smith, thanks so much.
PATTI SMITH: Thank you.
Eileen Pollack
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now time
for a "NewsHour" essay.
Women in the U.S. earn just over
57 percent of bachelor's degrees
in all fields, yet they
receive less than 20 percent of
degrees conferred in computer
science, engineering and
physics.
A recent study by the American
Association of University Women
found that, in 2013, 26
percent of all computing jobs
were held by women, a drop from
35 percent in 1990.
We asked Eileen Pollack, one of
the first two women to receive a
bachelor's of science
degree in physics at Yale and
who now teaches creative writing
at the University of Michigan,
to share an idea from her latest
book, "The Only Woman in the
Room: Why Science Is Still
a Boys' Club."
EILEEN POLLACK, Author, "The
Only Woman in the Room: Why
Science Is Still a Boys' Club":
When I was growing up, I wanted
passionately to be a physicist.
But in seventh grade, the
principal wouldn't let me enter
the accelerated track in science
and math. "Girls never go on to
careers in those subjects," he
told my mother. "Besides,"
he said, "getting skipped ahead
in science and math would ruin
my social life."
As a result, I arrived at Yale
in 1974 far behind my male
classmates. I failed my first
physics midterm, and my parents
urged me to switch majors. But I
worked incredibly hard
and didn't give up. Four years
later, I graduated with a nearly
perfect GPA, an A in a graduate
course in gravitational theory,
and two original research
papers.
Even so, I didn't go on. As
ridiculous as it seems now, I
assumed that if I were talented
enough to apply to graduate
school, one of my professors
would have let me know.
Since then, I have done a lot of
research on gender bias in the
sciences, and I'm sorry
to report not much has changed.
When parents ask why there are
still so few girls in advanced
science and math classes in high
school, I tell them, because
girls still need way more
encouragement than boys
to take those courses.
We still raise girls to look to
other people for assurance they
are attractive and smart,
while boys are raised to
determine their own value. Many
girls are still made to feel
it's
not feminine to be good
at science or math.
And if a girl complains about
how hard her AP calculus course
is, her parents are more
likely to let her drop it than
if her brother voices the same
complaint. As a result, by
the time they get to college,
most girls won't, or can't, sign
up for rigorous courses in
science or math. Those who do
often find themselves unprepared
or lacking in confidence.
What delivers the one-two punch
that knocks so many women and
minorities out of STEM fields
is that scientists have this
strange belief that, if you need
to be encouraged, you aren't
talented or dedicated enough to
be one of them. If you flunk
your first physics or calculus
midterm, you deserve
to be weeded out.
What they don't realize is that
young women and students of
color grow up in a society
that fails to encourage and
often actively discourages them
from thinking of themselves
as scientists. Ask most people
to picture a physicist, and they
will imagine Albert
Einstein or Sheldon from
"The Big Bang Theory."
My parents didn't know how to
provide me with the
encouragement I needed to
achieve my dreams.
But the solution isn't rocket
science. If your daughter finds
herself in a course designed
to weed her out, cheer her on,
urge her to seek extra help, and
give her a giant pat
on the back for having made it
so far, despite all the
discouragement she already has
overcome.
GWEN IFILL: Finally tonight:
Happy anniversary to us.
Forty years ago today, we
premiered as "The Robert MacNeil
Report." We have changed a
lot since then, but our core
journalistic standards remain.
Here's a quick look back at how
we have evolved since then. You
may or may not remember some
of it. I cannot tell you how
much of an honor it is to be
part of that tradition, and
especially
to sit across from you
as we continue it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I feel the
same way. We haven't been here
the whole time, but we have
been here a chunk of that time,
and, boy, do we feel lucky to be
right where we are,
thanks to our founders,
Jim and Robin.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks,
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: Bounce houses
can be lots of fun for
kids, but how safe are they? Our
data team finds that injuries
are on the rise. Read
about the risks on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Gwen
Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
on this anniversary, thank
you, and good night.